Add C++ Solution for Max indep set (#2580)
cpinitiative/usaco-guide: solutions/ys-MaxIndepSet.mdx

---
id: ys-MaxIndepSet
source: YS
title: Max Indep Set
author: Shijie Ren
---

<Spoiler title="Hint 1">

> Build complement graph.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Build a complement graph.
```
also what's a complement graph lol could you give a link or something

find subgraph of $S2$ that have direct edges with **all points** in subgraph of
$S1$ that we loop,

do set UNION operation with two subgraph in $S1$ and $S2$.

"Subgraph of $S2$ that have direct edges with **all points** in subgraph of $S1$
that we loop" can be solved with another simple Bitmask DP.

Time Complexity is $\mathcal{O}(2^{\frac N2})$.

</Spoiler>

<Spoiler title="Implementation">

**Time Complexity:** $\mathcal{O}(2^{\frac N2})$

<LanguageSection>

<CPPSection>

```cpp
#include <cstdio>
#define ll long long
#define N 45
int gr[N][N];
ll a[N];

ll popmax(ll x,ll y) {
	if(__builtin_popcountll(x)<__builtin_popcountll(y)) return y;
	else return x;
}

void mcp(int x,int dt,ll f[]) {
	for(int i=0,c,d; i<(1<<x); i++) {
		d=i&(-i);
		c=__builtin_ctzll(d);
		f[i]=popmax(f[i^d],f[i&a[c+dt]>>(dt)]|d);
	}

}

//Bitmask DP to solve MCP in O(2^n)
//f[S] = any possible MIS in S subgraph (f[S] is a set)
//choose any point in S called D
//if D isn't chosen F[S] = F[S/{D}]
//otherwise F[S] = F[D's neighbour in S]∪{D}

void print_mask(ll ans) {
	printf("%d\n",__builtin_popcountll(ans));
	while(ans) printf("%d ",__builtin_ctzll(ans)),ans-=ans&(-ans);

> }

Reviewer: ```cpp
/*
 * stylize multiline comments
 * like this
 */
```

Reviewer: (optional) please don't use as many `__builtin` functions, instead just use standard c++ functions

> ll f[1<<22],f2[1<<22],com[1<<22];

Reviewer: magic numbers bad

int main() {
	int n,m,u,v,i,j,n1,n2;
	scanf("%d%d",&n,&m),n1=n/2,n2=n-n1;
	for(i=1; i<=m; i++)
		scanf("%d%d",&u,&v),gr[u][v]=gr[v][u]=1;
	for(i=0; i<n; i++)
		for(j=0; j<n; j++)

> 			if(!gr[i][j]&&i!=j) a[i]|=1ll<<j;

Reviewer: braces n spaces

	//1.use bit mask to represent complement graph
	//now is to solve a Maximum Clique Problem(MCP)

	mcp(n1,0,f),mcp(n2,n1,f2);
	//2.Bitmask DP

	ll ans=0;
	for(com[0]=(1ll<<n)-1,i=1ll; i<(1ll<<n1); i++)
		com[i]=com[i-(i&(-i))]&a[__builtin_ctzll(i)];
	//com[S] = common neighbour of points in S
	for(i=0; i<(1ll<<n1); i++)
		ans=popmax(ans,(f2[com[i]>>n1]<<n1)|f[i]);
	print_mask(ans);
	//3.Meet-int-the-middle
	//loop every subsets called S1,construct S2
	//of all nodes of the second half which have edges to all the nodes in S1
	//(so that together they still form a clique shared by both halves)

> 	return 0;

Reviewer: what segment of code is this referring to?

$$
\texttt{dp}[S] = \texttt{dp}[E_k\cap S] \cup \{k\}
$$

(where $E_k$ represents the neighbour set of $k$)

otherwise

$$
\texttt{dp}[S] =\texttt{dp} [S / {k}]

$$

Take the maximum one.

$$
\texttt{dp}[S] = \max\{ \texttt{dp}[E_k\cap S] \cup \{k\} , \texttt{dp} [S / {k}] \}
$$

**Notice this** $\max$ **compared by popcount in the program.**

But the time complexity is $\mathcal{O}(2 ^ n)$ or $\mathcal{O}(2 ^ n \cdot n)$,
which needs further optimization.

#### Meet-in-the-middle

Divide the original graph into two parts, do DP respectively, and then merge:

if the two parts are $S1$ and $S2$, loop **every subgraph** of $S1$,

find subgraph of $S2$ that have direct edges with **all points** in subgraph of
$S1$ that we loop,

do set UNION operation with two subgraph in $S1$ and $S2$.

"Subgraph of $S2$ that have direct edges with **all points** in subgraph of $S1$
that we loop" can be solved with another simple Bitmask DP.

Time Complexity is $\mathcal{O}(2^{\frac N2})$.

</Spoiler>

<Spoiler title="Implementation">

**Time Complexity:** $\mathcal{O}(2^{\frac N2})$

<LanguageSection>

<CPPSection>

```cpp
#include <cstdio>
using ll = long long;

> const int N = 45;

Reviewer: isn't bitwise for N = 20?
just use `const int N = 20` and then when the need arises for 40 use `N * 2` instead

int gr[N][N];
ll a[N];

ll popmax(ll x, ll y) {
	if (__builtin_popcountll(x) < __builtin_popcountll(y)) {
		return y;
	} else {
		return x;
	}
}

void mcp(int x, int dt, ll f[]) {
	for (int i = 0, c, d; i < (1 << x); i++) {
		d = i & (-i);
		c = __builtin_ctzll(d);
		f[i] = popmax(f[i ^ d], f[i & a[c + dt] >> (dt)] | d);
	}
}

/*
 * Bitmask DP to solve MCP in O(2^n)
 * f[S] = any possible MIS in S subgraph (f[S] is a set)
 * choose any point in S called D
 * if D isn't chosen F[S] = F[S/{D}]
 * otherwise F[S] = F[D's neighbour in S] UNION {D}
 */
void print_mask(ll ans) {
	printf("%d\n", __builtin_popcountll(ans));
	while (ans)
		printf("%d ", __builtin_ctzll(ans)), ans -= ans & (-ans);
}

ll f[1 << (N / 2)], f2[1 << (N / 2)], com[1 << (N / 2)];

int main() {

> 	int n, m, u, v, i, j, n1, n2;

Reviewer: don't define all the variables here

	scanf("%d%d", &n, &m);
	n1 = n / 2;
	n2 = n - n1;
	for (i = 1; i <= m; i++) {
		scanf("%d%d", &u, &v);
		gr[u][v] = gr[v][u] = 1;
	}

	/*
	 * 1.use Bitmask to represent complement graph
	 * now is to solve a Maximum Clique Problem(MCP)
	 */
	for (i = 0; i < n; i++)
		for (j = 0; j < n; j++)
			if (!gr[i][j] && i != j)
				a[i] |= 1ll << j;

	// 2.Bitmask DP
	mcp(n1, 0, f);
	mcp(n2, n1, f2);

	// com[S] = common neighbour of points in S
	ll ans = 0;
	com[0] = (1ll << n) - 1;
	for (i = 1ll; i < (1ll << n1); i++)
		com[i] = com[i - (i & (-i))] & a[__builtin_ctzll(i)];

	/*
	 * 3.Meet-in-the-middle
	 * loop every subsets called S1,construct S2
	 * of all nodes of the second half which have edges to all the nodes in S1
	 * (so that together they still form a clique shared by both halves)
	 */
	for (i = 0; i < (1ll << n1); i++)

> 		ans = popmax(ans, (f2[com[i] >> n1] << n1) | f[i]);

Reviewer: braces all around here as well and everywehre there isn't

	print_mask(ans);

> 
> 	return 0;

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

$$

(where $E_k$ represents the neighbour set of $k$)

otherwise

$$
\texttt{dp}[S] =\texttt{dp} [S / {k}]

$$

Take the maximum one.

$$
\texttt{dp}[S] = \max\{ \texttt{dp}[E_k\cap S] \cup \{k\} , \texttt{dp} [S / {k}] \}
$$

**Notice this** $\max$ **compared by popcount in the program.**

But the time complexity is $\mathcal{O}(2 ^ n)$ or $\mathcal{O}(2 ^ n \cdot n)$,
which needs further optimization.

#### Meet-in-the-middle

Divide the original graph into two parts, do DP respectively, and then merge:

if the two parts are $S1$ and $S2$, loop **every subgraph** of $S1$,

find subgraph of $S2$ that have direct edges with **all points** in subgraph of
$S1$ that we loop,

do set UNION operation with two subgraph in $S1$ and $S2$.

"Subgraph of $S2$ that have direct edges with **all points** in subgraph of $S1$
that we loop" can be solved with another simple Bitmask DP.

Time Complexity is $\mathcal{O}(2^{\frac N2})$.

</Spoiler>

<Spoiler title="Implementation">

**Time Complexity:** $\mathcal{O}(2^{\frac N2})$

<LanguageSection>

<CPPSection>

```cpp
#include <cstdio>
#include <vector>
using namespace std;
using ll = long long;

ll popmax(ll x, ll y) {

> 	if (__builtin_popcountll(x) < __builtin_popcountll(y)) {
> 		return y;
> 	} else {
> 		return x;
> 	}

Reviewer: ```suggestion
	return __builtin_popcountll(x) < __builtin_popcountll(y) ? y : x;
```

Reviewer: also a quick comment on this method

}

> void mcp(int x, int dt, vector<ll> &f, vector<ll> a) {

Reviewer: what's `mcp`?

	for (int i = 0, c, d; i < (1 << x); i++) {
		d = i & (-i);

> 		c = __builtin_ctzll(d);

Reviewer: just a quick comment on what `__builtin_ctzll` does

		f[i] = popmax(f[i ^ d], f[i & a[c + dt] >> (dt)] | d);
	}
}

/*
 * Bitmask DP to solve MCP in O(2^n)
 * f[S] = any possible MIS in S subgraph (f[S] is a set)
 * choose any point in S called D
 * if D isn't chosen F[S] = F[S/{D}]
 * otherwise F[S] = F[D's neighbour in S] UNION {D}
 */
void print_mask(ll ans) {
	printf("%d\n", __builtin_popcountll(ans));
	while (ans) {
		printf("%d ", __builtin_ctzll(ans)), ans -= ans & (-ans);
	}
}

int main() {
	int n, m;
	scanf("%d%d", &n, &m);
	int n1, n2;
	n1 = n / 2;
	n2 = n - n1;

	vector<vector<int>> gr(n, vector<int>(n));
	for (int i = 1; i <= m; i++) {
		int u, v;

> 		scanf("%d%d", &u, &v);

Reviewer: use `cin` (optional)

---
id: ys-MaxIndepSet
source: YS
title: Max Indep Set
author: Shijie Ren
---

<Spoiler title="Hint 1">

Generate the complement of the given graph.

The complement or inverse of a graph G is a graph H on the same vertices
such that two distinct vertices of H are adjacent if and only if
they are **not** adjacent in G.

That is, to generate the complement of a graph,

> one fills in all the missing edges required to form a complete graph,

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
we'll fill in all the missing edges required to form a complete graph,
```
this one and the one below is optional, just makes it seem more friendly imo

> and removes all the edges that were previously there.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
and remove all the edges that were previously there.
```

</Spoiler>

<Spoiler title="Hint 2">

> Consider Bitmask DP when $ N \leq 20 $.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Consider [Bitmask DP](/gold/dp-bitmasks/) when $ N \leq 20 $.
```

Author: this problem is already in the gold/dp-bitmasks module and it may not be proper to link to this module again?

Reviewer 2: oh alr

</Spoiler>

<Spoiler title="Hint 3">

> If you stuck on DP when $ N \leq 20 $,

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
If you're stuck on DP when $ N \leq 20 $,
```

Let the DP array store **the set of points** in the subgraph
that meet specific conditions.

</Spoiler>

<Spoiler title="Hint 4">

Divide the original graph into two parts, do DP respectively, and then merge.

</Spoiler>

<Spoiler title="Explanation">

#### Bitmask DP

> First we can turn the original problem into another problem

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
First, we can alter the problem
```

by building the complement graph of the original graph.

> Then we can turn it into the maximum clique problem (MCP).

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
This turns it into maximum clique problem (MCP).
```

Clique can be seen as a complete graph.

> In fact, it is not a good way to store only the number of points in the answer graph ,
> because then it will be hard to transfer.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
In fact, it's not a good way to store just the number of points in the answer graph,
because it'll be hard to transfer.
```

Then switch ideas.

Let the DP array store the point set of the maximum clique in
the subgraph.

That is, the element in DP array is also a bitmask.

Simply use $\texttt{dp}[S]$ to represent **any** valid maximum clique solution in
subgraph $S$.

Consider a point $k$ in $S$.

if this point is in the maximum clique,

$$
\texttt{dp}[S] = \texttt{dp}[E_k\cap S] \cup \{k\}
$$

(where $E_k$ represents the neighbour set of $k$)

otherwise

$$
\texttt{dp}[S] =\texttt{dp} [S / {k}]

$$

Take the maximum one.

$$
\texttt{dp}[S] = \max\{ \texttt{dp}[E_k\cap S] \cup \{k\} , \texttt{dp} [S / {k}] \}
$$

**Notice this** $\max$ **compared by popcount in the program.**

> But the time complexity is $\mathcal{O}(2 ^ n)$ or $\mathcal{O}(2 ^ n \cdot n)$,
> which needs further optimization.
> 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
But the time complexity is $\mathcal{O}(2 ^ n)$ or $\mathcal{O}(2 ^ n \cdot n)$,
so we'll need to optimize it further.

```
optional

<CPPSection>

```cpp
#include <cstdio>
#include <iostream>
#include <vector>
using namespace std;
using ll = long long;

// this function returns the number with more 1-bits (in binary)
ll popmax(ll x, ll y) {
	/*
	 * __builtin_popcountll(x) returns the number of 1-bits of unsigned long
	 * long x (in binary)
	 */
	return __builtin_popcountll(x) < __builtin_popcountll(y) ? y : x;
}

void maxclique(int x, int dt, vector<ll> &f, vector<ll> a) {
	for (int i = 0, c, d; i < (1 << x); i++) {
		d = i & (-i);
		/*
		 * __builtin_ctzll(d) counts the trailing number of 0-bits of unsigned
		 * long long d (in binary)
		 */
		c = __builtin_ctzll(d);
		f[i] = popmax(f[i ^ d], f[i & a[c + dt] >> (dt)] | d);
	}
}

/*
 * Bitmask DP to solve Max Clique Problem in O(2^n)
 * f[S] = any possible max clique solution in S subgraph (f[S] is a set)
 * choose any point in S called D
 * if D isn't chosen F[S] = F[S/{D}]
 * otherwise F[S] = F[D's neighbour in S] UNION {D}
 */
void print_mask(ll ans) {
	cout << __builtin_popcountll(ans) << endl;
	while (ans) {
		cout << __builtin_ctzll(ans) << endl;
		ans -= ans & (-ans);
	}
}

int main() {
	int n, m;
	cin >> n >> m;
	int n1, n2;
	n1 = n / 2;

> 	n2 = n - n1;

Reviewer 3: `n1` is the size of the first set and `n2` is the size of the second

> 	n2 = n - n1;

Reviewer: yeah well it isn't obvious

int gr[N][N];
ll a[N];

ll popmax(ll x, ll y) {

> 	if (__builtin_popcountll(x) < __builtin_popcountll(y))

Reviewer: add braces too

	}
}

int main() {
	int n, m;
	scanf("%d%d", &n, &m);
	int n1, n2;
	n1 = n / 2;
	n2 = n - n1;

> 	vector<vector<int>> gr(n, vector<int>(n, 0));

Reviewer: ```suggestion
	vector<vector<int>> gr(n, vector<int>(n));
```
default value is 0

	int n1, n2;
	n1 = n / 2;
	n2 = n - n1;
	/*
	 * n1 is the size of the first half
	 * and n2 is the size of the second half

> 	 */

Reviewer: put this above the variable declarations

	 * 1.use Bitmask to represent complement graph
	 * now is to solve a Maximum Clique Problem(MCP)
	 */

> 	vector<ll> a(n, 0);

Reviewer: ```suggestion
	vector<ll> a(n);
```
